The Saturn V is a retired American super heavy-lift launch vehicle developed by NASA under the Apollo program for human exploration of the Moon. The rocket was human-rated, had three stages, and was liquid-fueled. Thirteen Saturn V vehicles were launched, from 1967 to 1973, all from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, nine of which launched 24 astronauts toward the Moon from Apollo 8 to Apollo 17. Its final launch was Skylab, the first American space station, converted from its own third stage.

The Saturn V was the first launch vehicle to carry humans beyond low Earth orbit (LEO), with the only other to do so being the Space Launch System (SLS) for the Artemis II lunar flyby in 2026. The Saturn V holds the record for the largest payload capacity to low Earth orbit, 140,000 kg (310,000 lb), which included the S-IVB third stage with remaining propellant to send the Apollo command and service module and Lunar Module to the Moon. At 34.5 meganewtons, it is the fourth most powerful rocket by thrust at launch and the second most powerful to carry humans, after SLS at 39 meganewtons.

The largest production model of the Saturn family of rockets, the Saturn V was designed at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. The program was managed by American George Mueller; technical design was led by scientists relocated from Nazi Germany, most notably Wernher von Braun, as well as Kurt Debus and Arthur Rudolph. This group had developed the first US launch vehicles, the Redstone rocket family, under the Army Ballistic Missile Agency. All engines were built by Rocketdyne. Boeing built the kerolox S-IC first stage powered by five F-1 engines; these remain the most powerful single chamber liquid-fuelled engines ever built. North American Aviation the hydrolox S-II second stage, and Douglas Aircraft Company the hydrolox S-IVB third stage, powered by five and one J-2 engines respectively. IBM and MSFC designed the rocket's instrument unit.

The rocket first launched in the November 1967 Apollo 4 test flight. Two unused Saturn Vs were built, originally designated for Apollo 19 and 20; three ground test articles were also built. Unrealized follow-on concepts included the Saturn II, Saturn MLV, and Saturn V ELV vehicles, which could include UA120 solid rocket boosters, the Saturn C-5N using a NERVA nuclear thermal rocket third stage, and the Saturn-Shuttle. Further flights were proposed for the Skylab B space station, Voyager Mars orbiters and landers, Prospector lunar rover, and a manned Venus flyby.

In September 1945 German rocket technologist Wernher von Braun was brought, under contract, to the United States during Operation Paperclip. Operation Paperclip, authorized by President Truman, brought in over 1,600 German rocket engineers and technicians from former Nazi Germany after World War II to the United States for government employment. Von Braun, who had helped create the German V-2 rocket, was assigned to the United States Army Ordnance Corps at Fort Strong, Massachusetts, then at Fort Bliss, Texas. During his time at Fort Bliss, von Braun and his team were not given much to work with. In the first couple of months, the Germans were only given "primitive or aged" wooden workshops and were not allowed to leave Fort Bliss without a military escort. In 1950, von Braun remarked to Daniel Lang, a reporter at The New Yorker, "At Peenemünde we had been coddled, here you were counting pennies." However, he wrote books and articles in popular magazines, such as Collier's.

This approach changed in 1957, when the Soviets launched Sputnik 1 atop an R-7 ICBM, which could carry a thermonuclear warhead to the U.S. The American Army and government began putting more effort towards sending Americans into space before the Soviets. The Army turned to von Braun's team, who had created the Jupiter series of rockets. The Juno I rocket launched the first American satellite in January 1958. Von Braun considered the Jupiter series of rockets to be a prototype of the upcoming Saturn series of rockets, and referred to it as "an infant Saturn".

The Saturn rocket family was named after the planet Saturn because the design of the various Saturn rockets evolved from the earlier Jupiter vehicles, which were named after the planet Jupiter. Between 1960 and 1962, the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) designed a series of Saturn rockets that could be deployed for Earth orbit and lunar missions. NASA planned to use a Saturn vehicle as part of the Earth orbit rendezvous (EOR) method for a lunar mission. Development on the Saturn C-3 rocket was just beginning when the MSFC planned an even bigger rocket, the Saturn C-4, which would use four F-1 engines in its first stage and five J-2 engines in its second stage.

On January 25, 1962, NASA gave its approval to build the C-5. The three-stage rocket would consist of the S-IC first stage, with five F-1 engines; the S-II second stage with five J-2 engines; and the S-IVB third stage, with a single J-2 engine. The C-5 would undergo component testing even before the first model was constructed. The S-IVB third stage would be used as the second stage for the C-1B, which would serve both to demonstrate proof of concept and feasibility for the C-5 and to provide flight data critical to the development of the C-5. Rather than undergoing testing for each major component, the C-5 would be tested in an "all-up" fashion, meaning that the first test flight of the rocket would include complete versions of all three stages. By testing all components at once, far fewer test flights would be required before a crewed launch.

The C-5 was confirmed as NASA's choice for the Apollo program in mid-1962, and was named the Saturn V in February 1963. In the same month, the C designations were dropped; the C-1 became the Saturn I and C-1B became Saturn IB. By November 1962, NASA had switched to and confirmed a lunar orbit rendezvous (LOR) method for a lunar mission. The outside contractors that were chosen for the construction were: Boeing (S-IC), North American Aviation (S-II), Douglas Aircraft (S-IVB), and IBM (S-IU).

Early in the planning process, NASA considered three methods for the Moon mission: Earth orbit rendezvous (EOR), direct ascent, and lunar orbit rendezvous (LOR). A direct ascent configuration would require an extremely large rocket to send a three-man spacecraft to land directly on the lunar surface with enough fuel to fly back to Earth. NASA proposed the Nova for this method. An EOR would launch the direct-landing spacecraft in two smaller parts which would combine in Earth orbit. A LOR mission would involve a single rocket launching two spacecraft: a mother ship, and a smaller, two-man landing module which would rendezvous back with the main spacecraft in lunar orbit. The lander would be discarded and the mother ship would return home.

Originally, in the early 1960s, when the Saturn project was transferred to NASA from the U.S Army, direct ascent was the preferred method. At the same time, the Air Force had been developing of a lunar mission named Lunex, which would use the direct ascent method. The Space Systems Division estimated that a mission to the Moon using direct ascent could be done by 1967 at an estimated cost of $7.5 billion (equivalent to $60.1 billion in 2024). NASA dismissed both of the rendezvous methods as "dangerous and impractical." Von Braun's team had shown an interest in using the EOR method as early as 1958, arguing that smaller vehicles could be used. Around the same time, Thomas Dolan and his team from the Vought Astronautics Division became the first to study the LOR method. Although his team presented their ideas to NASA, nothing came from his proposal.

In 1960, several NASA officials, including Langley Research Center engineer John Houbolt, argued that a lunar orbit rendezvous provided the simplest landing on the Moon with the most cost–efficient launch vehicle, and the best chance to accomplish the lunar landing within the decade. Throughout 1961, Houbolt and his team went around convincing other research teams to pursue LOR, catching the attention of the chief of the Engineering Division, James Chamberlin. Although in charge of what would later become Project Gemini, he proposed using a two-man spacecraft using LOR to send a one-man lunar lander to the surface of the Moon. Although Chamberlin's plan stalled, it did mark a shift towards LOR. Houbolt also managed to convince NASA official George Low. In June 1962, von Braun announced LOR would be MSFC's choice. As more NASA officials became convinced, LOR was officially selected and announced as the mission configuration for the Apollo program on November 7, 1962 by NASA administrator James E. Webb.
